>> Jason Pamental: I wanna
talk about centered text.
Or rather,
I wanna talk about how inappropriate and
hard to read large blocks of
centered text tend to be.
And the reason for that is your
eye has to travel back to some
point to start reading the next line.
And if your eye doesn't know
where that point's going to be,
it's going to slow you down.
That is why a smooth left edge,
if you are reading English, or
a smooth right edge if you are reading
something right to left like in Arabic.
That makes all the difference in the world
to the ease with which you can take in
content.
So anything more than about two lines of
text, if you are centering that text,
you are slowing people down.
You are making it harder for
them to get the point.
A lot of people do this,
it's built in to a ton of frameworks.
Because especially with a responsive
site it's easy, because centered text
centers easily under this picture and
it makes a nice card layout.
And It doesn't matter if it's one, two or
five across, it's a real problem for
people to read.
So what I suggest to people instead, and
we can look at an example of this
later and play around with it, but
align the text to the left and
simply pad it in one or two m.
If you want to have that text visually
centered underneath something and
not flowing all the way out.
You can still left align it, but
just pad in that left side and
the ragged right side
will take care of itself.
It will still look visually
centered in that card layout, but
it won't be hard to read.
And the point that I have here goes along
with that is the maximum line length.
That's another thing you see
in responsive sites a lot,
is no limit to the width of the text.
So as the screen gets bigger and bigger
and bigger, you might have 80, 90, 100, or
150 characters on a line,
your eye can't follow that.
It's just not gonna be a good experience.
One of the sort of brain
hurst rules is around 65 to
75 characters per line,
that's what we're used to.
Online, I think people are getting used
to reading slightly longer line lengths.
So 38em translates to usually
around 65 to 70 characters.
Now the reason I know that is because
I've used a calculator a lot.
But by specifying an ems that's tied to
the types of size that you're measuring.
So it's always relative to the type
size that it's applying to.
So if that is rendering at 100% or
16 pixels, or 20 pixels or
whatever, it doesn't really matter.
Because that 38em is relative to the font
size of the paragraph itself, you
will always have a consistent line length
that will be easy for people to read.
And you can do an experiment 38, 40, 42em
it's all gonna be in the right ballpark,
so you can match that with your design.
You don't want to end up
with really weird gaps, but
you still want people to read the text.
You want people to be
able to read the content.
That's the whole goal.
So that's why you wanna make sure that you
don't let those paragraphs run all the way
across the screen.
[COUGH]
There are some other interesting
CSS units out there in
terms of sizing things.
CH and CX are ones that are supposed
to be related to character height or
character width.
They're not terribly reliable, and
I don't think they bring a greater value
than simply getting used to what is
an translation and just relying on that.
That I've found to apply much more
universally than saying 75ch,
which is supposed to equate to
about 75 characters per line.
I've not found that to be
typically very useful.
vw and vh, or viewport width and viewport
height, those are tremendously useful.
We're gonna be leaning into viewport
width units quite a bit today.
And those tend to be,
well a viewport width unit,
there are 100 view port units,
either high or wide.
It's like percentage, except it works.
So view port width units is
an interesting way to size types so
the type is always proportional
to the size of the window.
The problem that you can run into there
is that window can sometimes get narrower
than you expect or wider than you
expect and there's no low or high end.
We have a solution for
that that we're gonna play with.
But just know that setting something
just in straight view port units
does have risks based on the size
of the screen being much larger or
smaller than you anticipate.
>> Jason Pamental: Font sizing,
four years ago, I was still on
the fence about using REMs,
or sort of Root M's.
They're fine,
there are reasons to use an M or a REM.
I'm gonna talk about
the differences just a little bit.
It has started to become acceptable or
fashionable again to go
back to using pixels.
Don't do it, it's a bad idea for
a couple of reasons.
When you set something in pixels
right now, it's using something,
it's technically a reference
pixel not an actual one.
So your device, like an iPhone 10, reports
something like 380 pixels across for
the whole screen when in truth the real
resolution is about three times that.
Every device is doing something
slightly different to report back
what that reference pixel value is.
And every once in a while you find
devices that actually just go with true
resolution when you don't expect it to.
If you're setting things in pixels,
you might find your content the size of
a postage stamp in the middle
of a touch screen laptop.
If you had set it in EMs,
you wouldn't have this problem.
So break points, it's really easy.
When you're setting break points in EMs,
it's always going to be relating back to
16 pixels, it just always works that way.
So 1em, 16 pixels,
if you wanna breakpoint that is somewhere
around 400 pixels, just divide by 16.
You don't have to put any
more thought into that.
Whatever the pixel value is that you
were going to use in your breakpoint,
divide by 16, use an.
Don't use a REM, use an.
REMs are great when you
want to always come back to
something like setting
a consistent max-width for
headings and body copy,
we'll be doing that later today.
REMs are little bit different than in And
that REM is always going back to the root
value which is typically going
to be something like 16 pixels.
Unless you set the body or
the HTML element to be some other size and
everything references back to that point.
EMs are always relative to whatever
the parent is somewhere along the way.
So if you've set a font size on a div and
then you set a font size on an H1,
it's referring back to the containing div,
not the root.
So that's where people get
into trouble with EMs.
But sometimes you really need
it relative to the thing itself.
So sizing margin on a button
in EMs is relative to the text size
that's on the button, that makes sense.
You want that actually to flex and
grow with the size of the text not
necessarily with the size of the root.
So there's a lot more to it than that.
It's just when you set all of
these things in a relative unit,
that means if somebody
needs to resize the text,
if they need an accessibility setting,
all of these things scale uniformly.
If your break points and margins and
text sizes are all set in EMs or
REMs, everything scales smoothly together.
It's a far better solution for
accessibility, and
it also means that your design will
work with that page zoom flawlessly.
It also means that when that
reference pixel standard changes,
your design will still work.
Because this is all going back to
whatever is deemed by the browser or
device manufacturer to be a readable size
of text, whatever that 100% value is.
So it's not that hard if you need
to write a mix in or something so
that it outputs EMs or
REMs when you put in a pixel value.
That's totally fine as
we use these tools so
we don't have to think that hard
about some of these things.
But just know that in the output value,
what gets shipped to the browser,
the only place where pixels belong
is in maybe a border thickness.
Other than that, there's no need
to have a pixel value in your CSS.
That may be something of a controversial
statement to some people, but
I will stand by that and I have since
the beginning of responsive design.
And I never get into
trouble with this stuff.
And I've seen many other designs fall
apart when one little thing changes.
If we keep it all relative, it's all based
around readable text, that is the point.
All of our projects,
all of our websites, all of our apps,
the core of it is the text on the screen
in order to get that point across.
So someone can buy a thing,
can read a thing, can go do a thing,
they're reading something.
Instagram is pretty much the only place
where that's not really going to be
that important,
except reading the comments is hilarious.
So, still, text.
>> Jason Pamental: This last
part is always a struggle.
But if you never put
Lorem Ipsum into your design,
you will never fall victim to not
knowing how it will really behave.
Because when you put the exact same string
of text in every single card content of
the design while you're proofing it,
you're never gonna know what's gonna
happen when a real headline goes in and
you find that weird
little in between space.
You'll never know it's there if
you're not using real content.
So it doesn't matter if it's current.
Go take some stuff from Moby Dick,
that's my go to.
I always go back and
use that in my sample designs.
Or just go copy the existing content.
But make sure that you use real stuff.
So that way when you're working on
your card layouts, when you're working
on the article design, the basic page
framework navigation whatever it is,
if you've got real words you've
got real design considerations.
If you don't do that and
it's just link one, link two,
link three when you're trying to
lay out your navigation, you have
no idea what's gonna happen when you
have a 37 word link that goes in there.
Because I guarantee you it's gonna happen,
because as soon as we put
the admin user in control of
the content management system, they're
going to do six things that you never
knew were even possible in the first day.
And that's just the nature of things.
But that's what we have to learn
to work with as designers and
developers, to build a resilient web.